The Inception phase goes from the idea of the product to the vision of the end product

What this involves is delimiting the project scope and making the business case for the product present -- Why is it worth doing? What are the success criteria? What are the main risks? What resources will be needed? Etc


Specifically this phase answers three main questions:


1. Who are the major users (actors) and what will the system do for them?

To answer this we produce a simplified use-case model where only a few use-cases are represented and described, sort of an initial use-case model


2. What could be an architecture for the system?

We first develop a tentative/initial architecture that describes the most cruicial subsystems


3. What is the plan and how much will it cost?

You then identify the main risks for the project and also produce a rough plan with estimates of resources, initial planning for thephases with dates and milestones



Specifically, the Inception phase generates several deliverables

The deliverables are:


1. Vison document with general vision of the core project's requirements, key features, and main constraints


2. Initial use-case model

A use-case model that includes an initial set of use-cases that will be later refined


3. Initial project glossary and initial business case

Describes the main terms using the project and their meaning and the inital business case including the business context and success criteria


4. Initial project plan

Shows the phases, iterations, roles of the participants, schedule and initial estimates


5. Risk assessment document

Describes the main risks and counter measures for this risk


6. Prototypes (Might generate one or more, or none at all)

Making a prototype can help us address some specific risks we identified of show some specific aspect of the system of which we are unsure to the stakeholders



When we are done with the Inception phase we hit the first major milestone for the cycle we are currently performing

There is some evaluation criteria that will tell whether we can consider the inception phase concluded or not:


1. Stakeholder concurrence, which means that all the stakeholders must agree on the scope, definition, and cost/schedule estimates for the projects


2. Requirements understanding as evidenced by the fidelity of the primary use cases

Out of the initial primary use-cases that we have identified so far, which is the right one for our system?


3. Credibility of the cost/schedule estimates, priorities, risks, and development process


4. Depth and breadth of any prototype tht was developed



If the inception phase cannot meet the above criteria then it fails to pass this milestone

If this is the case, the project can be cancelled or considerably re-thought


To summerize, the Inception phase is the phase in which we produce the initial vision, use-case model, project plan, risk assessment, and possibly prototypes for the project AND we have to make sure that all of these deliverables satisfy a set of criteria so that we can continue the project

Otherwise, we will either cancel the project or rethink the scope or the other aspects